<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI: Lock and Key and Sinners Three</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Lock and Key and Sinners Three</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>After leaving Santos I rode on to a belt of wood about two miles east of the road, and, passing through it, surveyed the country lying beyond. The only habitation near it was a shepherd’s lonely rancho, standing on an open plain of yellow grass, over which a scattered flock of sheep and a few horses were grazing. I determined to remain in the wood till near noon, then proceed to the rancho to get breakfast, and commence my search for a horse and sidesaddle in the neighbourhood. After unsaddling my horse and tying him to a tree, where there were some pickings of grass and herbage about the roots, I lit a cigar and made myself comfortable on my rugs in the shade. Presently I had some visitors in a flock of <i xml:lang="es">urracas</i>, or magpies, as they are called in the vernacular, or Guira cuckoos; a graceful, loquacious bird resembling a magpie, only with a longer tail and a bold, red beak. These ill-mannered birds skulked about in the branches over me all the time I remained in the wood, scolding me so incessantly in their intolerably loud, angry, rattling notes, varied occasionally with shrill whistlings and groans, that I could scarcely even hear myself think. They soon succeeded in bringing all the other birds within hearing distance to the spot to take part in the demonstration. It was unreasonable of the cuckoos, to say the least of it, for it was now long past their breeding season, so that parental solicitude could not be pleaded as an excuse for their churlish behaviour. The others⁠—tanagers, finches, tyrant-birds; red, white, blue, grey, yellow, and mixed⁠—were, I must own, less troublesome, for, after hopping about for a while, screaming, chirping, and twittering, they very sensibly flew away, no doubt thinking their friends the cuckoos were making a great deal too much fuss. My sole mammalian visitor was an armadillo, that came hurrying towards me, looking curiously like a little old bent-backed gentleman in a rusty black coat trotting briskly about on some very important business. It came to within three yards of my feet, then stopped, and seemed astonished beyond measure at my presence, staring at me with its little, bleary, blinking eyes, and looking more like the shabby old gentleman than ever. Then it trotted away through the trees, but presently returned for a second inspection; and after that it kept coming and going, till I inadvertently burst out laughing, whereupon it scuttled away in great alarm, and returned no more. I was sorry I had frightened the amusing little beggar, for I felt in that exceedingly lighthearted mood when one’s merriment is ready to brim over at the slightest provocation. Yet that very morning poor Demetria’s appeal had deeply stirred my heart, and I was now embarked on a most quixotic and perhaps perilous adventure! Possibly the very fact of that adventure being before me had produced an exhilarating effect on my mind, and made it impossible for me to be sad, or even decently composed.</p>
			<p>After spending a couple of hours in the pleasant shade, the blue smoke ascending from the rancho before me gave notice of the approaching breakfast hour; so, saddling my horse, I went to make my morning call, the cuckoos hailing my departure with loud mocking shouts and whistling calls, meant to inform all their feathered friends that they had at last succeeded in making their haunt too hot for me.</p>
			<p>At the rancho I was received by a somewhat surly-looking young man, with long, intensely black hair and moustache, and who wore in place of a hat a purple cotton handkerchief tied about his head. He did not seem to be over-pleased at my visit, and invited me rather ungraciously to alight if I thought proper. I followed him into the kitchen, where his little brown-skinned wife was preparing breakfast, and I fancied, after seeing her, that her prettiness was the cause of his inhospitable manner towards a stranger. She was singularly pretty, with a seductive, soft brown skin, ripe, pouting lips of a rich purple-red, and when she laughed, which happened very frequently, her teeth glistened like pearls. Her crisp, black hair hung down unbound and disordered, for she looked like a very careless little beauty; but when she saw me enter, she blushed and tossed her tresses away from her shoulders, then carefully felt the pendants dropping from her ears to assure herself that they were safe, or possibly to attract my attention to them. The frequent glances her laughing, dark eyes shot at me soon convinced me that she was one of those charming little wives⁠—charming, that is, when they are the wives of other people⁠—who are not satisfied with a husband’s admiration.</p>
			<p>I had timed my arrival well, for the roast lamb over the coals was just assuming a deep golden brown colour, and sending out a most delicious fragrance. During the repast which followed I amused my auditors, and myself, by telling a few innocent lies, and began by saying that I was on my return to Rocha from Montevideo.</p>
			<p>The shepherd remarked suspiciously that I was not on the right road.</p>
			<p>I answered that I knew it; then proceeded to say that I had met with a misfortune on the previous evening, which in the end had led me out of the right road. I had only been married a few days, I continued, and at this declaration my host looked relieved, while little gipsy suddenly seemed to lose all interest in me.</p>
			<p>“My wife,” I said, “set her heart on having a sidesaddle, as she is very fond of riding; so, having business which took me to town, I there purchased one for her, and was returning with it on a led horse⁠—my wife’s horse, unfortunately⁠—when I stopped last evening to get some refreshment at a pulperia on the road. While eating some bread and sausage a tipsy person, who happened to be there, imprudently began to explode some firecrackers, which so terrified the horses tied at the gate that several of them broke loose and escaped. My wife’s horse with the sidesaddle on him escaped with them; then, mounting my own horse, I started in pursuit, but failed to overtake the runaway. Finally it joined a herd of mares, and these, becoming terrified, fled from me, leading me a chase of several leagues, till I lost sight of them in the darkness.”</p>
			<p>“If your wife resembles mine in disposition, friend,” said he, with a somewhat sorrowful smile, “you would have continued following that runaway animal with the sidesaddle to the end of the world.”</p>
			<p>“I can say this,” I returned gravely, “without a sidesaddle, good or bad, I am not going to present myself before her. I intend inquiring at every house on my way to the <span xml:lang="es">Lomas de Rocha</span> till I can hear of one for sale.”</p>
			<p>“What will you give for one?” said he, becoming interested.</p>
			<p>“That will depend on its condition. If it is as good as new I will give the amount it cost and two dollars profit besides.”</p>
			<p>“I know of a sidesaddle that cost ten dollars a year ago, but it has never been used. It belongs to a neighbour three leagues from here, and she would sell it, I believe.”</p>
			<p>“Show me the house,” I said, “and I will go directly and offer twelve dollars for it.”</p>
			<p>“You speak of Doña Petrona’s sidesaddle, Antonio?” said the little wife. “She would sell it for what it cost⁠—perhaps for eight dollars. Ah, pumpkin-head, why did you not think to make all that profit? Then I could have bought slippers and a thousand things.”</p>
			<p>“You are never satisfied, Cleta,” he returned. “Have you not got slippers to your feet?”</p>
			<p>She tossed up a pretty foot and displayed it cased in rather a shabby little slipper. Then, with a laugh, she kicked it off towards him. “There,” she exclaimed, “put it in your bosom and keep it⁠—something precious! And some day when you go to Montevideo, and wish to appear very grand before all the town, wear it on your great toe.”</p>
			<p>“Who expects reason from a woman?” said Antonio, shrugging his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“Reason! you have no more brains than a Muscovy duck, Antonio. You might have made this profit, but you never can make money like other men, and therefore you will always be poorer than the spiders. I have said this before very often, and only hope you will not forget it, for in future I intend to speak of other things.”</p>
			<p>“Where would I have got the ten dollars to pay Petrona for the saddle?” he retorted, losing his temper.</p>
			<p>“My friend,” I said, “if the saddle can be had, it is only just that you should have the profit. Take ten dollars, and if you buy it for me I will pay you two more.”</p>
			<p>This proposal pleased him greatly, while Cleta, the volatile, clapped her hands with delight. While Antonio prepared to go to his neighbour’s after the saddle I went out to a solitary thorn-tree about fifty yards from the rancho, and, spreading my poncho in the shade, lay down to sleep the siesta.</p>
			<p>Before the shepherd had been long gone I heard a great noise in the house, like banging on doors and on copper vessels, but took no notice, supposing it to proceed from Cleta engaged in some unusually noisy domestic operation. At length I heard a voice calling to me, “Señor! Señor!”</p>
			<p>Getting up, I went to the kitchen, but no person was there. Suddenly a loud knock was given on the door communicating with the second room. “Oh, my friend,” cried Cleta’s voice behind it, “my ruffian of a husband has locked me in⁠—can you let me out, do you think?”</p>
			<p>“Why has he locked you in?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“The question! Because he is a brute, of course. He always does it when he goes out. Is it not horrible?”</p>
			<p>“It only shows how fond he is of you,” I returned.</p>
			<p>“Are you so atrocious as to defend him? And I thought you had a heart⁠—so handsome, too! When I saw you I said, Ah, had I married this man, what a happy life!”</p>
			<p>“Thank you for your good opinion,” I said. “I am very sorry you are locked in, because it prevents me from seeing your pretty face.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you think it pretty? Then you <em>must</em> let me out. I have put up my hair now, and look prettier than when you saw me.”</p>
			<p>“You look prettier with it down,” I answered.</p>
			<p>“Ah, down it goes again then!” she exclaimed.⁠—“Yes, you are right, it does look best that way. Is it not like silk? You shall feel it when you liberate me.”</p>
			<p>“That I cannot do, Cletita mine. Your Antonio has taken away the key.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, cruel man! He left me no water, and I am perishing with thirst. What shall I do? Look, I will put my hand under the door for you to feel how hot it is; I am consumed with fever and thirst in this oven.”</p>
			<p>Presently her little brown hand came out at my feet, there being sufficient space between the floor and wood to pass it through. I stooped and took it in mine, and found it a hot, moist little hand, with a pulse beating very fast.</p>
			<p>“Poor child!” I said, “I will pour some water in a plate and pass it to you under the door.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, you are bad to insult me!” she cried. “What, am I a cat to drink water from a plate? I could cry my eyes out”; here followed sob-like sounds. “Besides,” she suddenly resumed, “it is fresh air, not water, I require. I am suffocated, I cannot breathe. Oh, dear friend, save me from fainting. Force back the door till the bolt slips out.”</p>
			<p>“No, no, Cleta, it cannot be done.”</p>
			<p>“What, with your strength! I could almost do it myself with my poor little hands. Open, open, open, before I faint.”</p>
			<p>She had evidently sunk down on the floor sobbing, after making that practical suggestion; and, casting about for burglarious implements to aid me, I found the spit and a wedge-shaped piece of hard wood. These I inserted just above and below the lock, and, forcing back the door on its frame, I soon had the satisfaction of seeing the bolt slip from the catch.</p>
			<p>Out sprang Cleta, flushed, tearful, her hair all in disorder, but laughing gleefully at having regained her liberty.</p>
			<p>“Oh, dear friend, I thought you were going to leave me!” she cried. “How agitated I am⁠—feel how my heart beats. Never mind, I can now pay that wretch out. Is not revenge sweet, sweet, sweet?”</p>
			<p>“Now, Cleta,” I said, “take three mouthfuls of fresh air and a drink of water, then let me lock you in again.”</p>
			<p>She laughed mockingly, and shook her hair like a wild young colt.</p>
			<p>“Ah, you are not serious⁠—do you not think I know?” she cried. “Your eyes tell me everything. Besides, you could not shut me up again if you tried.” Here she made a sudden dash at the door, but I caught her and held her a close prisoner.</p>
			<p>“Let me go, monster⁠—oh, no, not monster, dear, sweet friend, beautiful as the⁠—moon, sun, stars. I am dying for fresh air. I will come back to the oven before he returns. If he caught me out, what blows! Come, let us sit under the tree together.”</p>
			<p>“That would be disobeying your husband,” I said, trying to look stern.</p>
			<p>“Never mind, I will confess it all to the priest some day, then it will be as if it had never happened. Such a husband⁠—poof! If you were not a married man⁠—<em>are</em> you married? What a pity! Say again, am I pretty?”</p>
			<p>“Say first, Cleta, have you a horse a woman can ride on, and if you have one, will you sell it to me?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes, the best horse in the <span xml:lang="es">Banda Orientál</span>. They say it is worth six dollars⁠—will you buy it for six dollars? No, I shall not sell it⁠—I shall not tell you that I have a horse till you answer me. Am I pretty, sir stranger?”</p>
			<p>“Tell me first about the horse, then ask me what you like.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing more will I tell you⁠—not a word. Yes, everything. Listen. When Antonio comes back, ask him to sell you a horse for your wife to ride. He will try to sell you one of his own, a demon full of faults like his master; false-footed, lame in the shoulder, a roarer, old as the south wind. A black piebald⁠—remember. Offer to buy a roan with a cream nose. That is my horse. Offer him six dollars. Now say, am I pretty?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, beautiful, Cleta; your eyes are stars, your mouth is a rosebud, sweeter than honey a thousand times.”</p>
			<p>“Now you talk like a wise man,” she laughed; then, holding my hand, she led me to the tree and sat down by my side on the poncho.</p>
			<p>“And how old are you, little one?” I asked.</p>
			<p>“Fourteen⁠—is that very old? Ah, fool, to tell my age truly⁠—no woman does that. Why did I not say thirteen? And I have been married six months, such a long time! I am sure I have green, blue, yellow, grey hairs coming out all over my head by this time. And what about my hair, sir, you never spoke of that? Did I not let it down for you? Is it not soft and beautiful? Tell me, sir, what about my hair?”</p>
			<p>“In truth it is soft and beautiful, Cleta, and covers you like a dark cloud.”</p>
			<p>“Does it not! Look, I will cover my face with it. Now I am hidden like the moon in a cloud, and now, look, out comes the moon again! I have a great respect for the moon. Say, holy friar, am I like the moon?”</p>
			<p>“Say, little sweet lips, why do you call me holy friar?”</p>
			<p>“Say first, holy friar, am I like the moon?”</p>
			<p>“No, Cleta, you are not like the moon, though you are both married women; you are married to Antonio⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Poor me!”</p>
			<p>“And the moon is married to the sun.”</p>
			<p>“Happy moon, to be so far from him!”</p>
			<p>“The moon is a quiet wife, but you chatter like a parakeet.”</p>
			<p>“And am I not able to be quiet also, monk? Look, I will be quiet as the moon⁠—not a word, not a breath.” Then she threw herself back on the poncho, feigning sleep, her arms above her head, her hair scattered everywhere, only a tress or two half shading her flushed face and round, heaving bosom that would not be quiet. There was just a little mocking smile on her lips, just a little gleam of laughing eyes under her drooping lashes, for she could not help watching my face for admiration. In such an attitude the tempting little witch might have made the tepid blood of an ascetic boil.</p>
			<p>Two or three hours thus flew swiftly by while I listened to her lively prattle, which, like the lark’s singing, had scarcely a pause in it, her attempt at being still and moonlight having ended in a perfect fiasco. At length, pouting her pretty lips and complaining of her hard lot, she said it was time to go back to her prison; but all the time I was engaged in forcing back the bolt into its place she chattered without ceasing. “Adieu, Sun, husband of the moon,” she said. “Adieu, sweet, sweet friend, buyer of sidesaddles! They were all lies you told⁠—I know, I know. You want a horse and sidesaddle to carry off some girl tonight. Happy she! Now I must sit in the dark alone, alone, alone, till Antonio, the atrocious, comes to liberate me with his iron key⁠—ah, fool!”</p>
			<p>Before I had been long back under my tree, Antonio appeared, bringing the sidesaddle in triumph on his horse before him. After going in to release his wife he came out and invited me to take maté. I then mentioned my wish to buy a good horse; he was only too willing to sell, and in a few minutes his horses were driven up for inspection. The black piebald was first offered, a very handsome, quiet-looking animal, apparently quite sound. The cream-nose, I noticed, was a bony, long-bodied brute, with sleepy eyes and a ewe neck. Could it be that the little double-dealing witch had intended to deceive me? But in a moment I dismissed such a suspicion with the scorn it merited. Let a woman be as false as she can, and able to fool her husband to the top of her bent, she is, compared with the man who wishes to sell you a horse, openness and truth itself. I examined the piebald critically, walking and trotting him round; looked into his mouth, then at hoofs and fetlocks, beloved of windgalls; gazed with fixed attention into his eyes and dealt him a sudden brisk blow on the shoulder.</p>
			<p>“No weak spot will you find, señor,” said Antonio the mendacious, who was certainly the greatest of the three sinners met together in that place. “He is my best horse, only four years old, gentle as a lamb, sound as a bell. Surefooted, señor, like no other horse; and with such an easy pace you can ride him at a gallop with a tumbler of water in your hand and not spill a drop. I will give him away to you for ten dollars, because you have been generous about the sidesaddle, and I am anxious to serve you well.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you, my friend,” I said. “Your piebald is fifteen years old, lame in the shoulders, broken in his wind, and has more vices than any seven horses in the <span xml:lang="es">Banda Orientál</span>. I would not allow my wife to ride such a dangerous brute, for, as I told you, I have not been long married.”</p>
			<p>Antonio framed his face to express astonishment and virtue indignant; then with the point of his knife he scratched the figure of a cross on the ground, and was about to swear solemnly on it that I was egregiously mistaken, that his beast was a kind of equine angel, ora Pegasus, at least, when I interfered to stop him. “Tell as many lies as you like,” I said, “and I will listen to them with the greatest interest; but do not swear on the figure of the cross to what is false, for then the four or five or six dollars profit you have made on the sidesaddle will scarcely be sufficient to buy you absolution for such a sin.”</p>
			<p>He shrugged his shoulders and restored the sacrilegious knife to its sheath. “There are my horses,” he said in an injured tone. “They are a kind of animal you seem to know a great deal about; select one and deceive yourself. I have endeavoured to serve you; but there are some people who do not know a friend when they see one.”</p>
			<p>I then minutely examined all the other horses, and finally finished the farce by leading out the roan cream-nose, and was pleased to notice the crestfallen expression of my good shepherd.</p>
			<p>“Your horses do not suit me,” I said, “so I cannot buy one. I will, however, purchase this old cow; for it is the only animal here I could trust my wife on. You can have seven dollars for it⁠—not one copper more, for, like the Emperor of China, I speak once only.”</p>
			<p>He plucked off his purple headgear and scratched his raven head, then led me back to the kitchen to consult his wife, “For, señor,” he said, “you have, by some fatality, selected her horse.” When Cleta heard that seven dollars had been offered for the roan, she laughed with joy. “Oh, Antonio, he is only worth six dollars! Yes, señor, you shall have him, and pay the seven dollars to me. Not to my husband. Who will say now that I cannot make money? And now, Antonio, I have no horse to ride on, you can give me the bay with white forefeet.”</p>
			<p>“Do not imagine such a thing!” exclaimed her husband.</p>
			<p>After taking maté I left them to settle their affairs, not doubting which would come out best from a trial of skill. When I arrived in sight of Peralta’s trees I unsaddled and picketed my horses, then stretched myself out on my rugs. After the excitements and pleasures of that day, which had robbed me of my siesta, I quickly fell into a very sound sleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
