<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			
<h2>
 Preface
 </h2>
<p>
 This work was first issued in 1885, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Sampson Low, in two slim
 volumes, with the longer, and to most persons, enigmatical title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The
 Purple Land That England Lost</i>. A purple land may be found in almost
 any region of the globe, and ’tis of our gains, not our losses, we keep
 count. A few notices of the book appeared in the papers, one or two of the
 more serious literary journals reviewing it (not favourably) under the
 heading of “Travels and Geography“; but the reading public cared not to
 buy, and it very shortly fell into oblivion. There it might have remained
 for a further period of nineteen years, or for ever, since the sleep of a
 book is apt to be of the unawakening kind, had not certain men of letters,
 who found it on a forgotten heap and liked it in spite of its faults, or
 because of them, concerned themselves to revive it.
 </p>
<p>
 We are often told that an author never wholly loses his affection for a
 first book, and the feeling has been likened (more than once) to that of a
 parent towards a first-born. I have not said it, but in consenting to this
 reprint I considered that a writer’s early or unregarded work is apt to be
 raked up when he is not standing by to make remarks. He may be absent on a
 journey from which he is not expected to return. It accordingly seemed
 better that I should myself supervise a new edition, since this would
 enable me to remove a few of the numerous spots and pimples which decorate
 the ingenious countenance of the work before handing it on to posterity.
 </p>
<p>
 Besides many small verbal corrections and changes, the deletion of some
 paragraphs and the insertion of a few new ones, I have omitted one entire
 chapter containing the Story of a Piebald Horse, recently reprinted in
 another book entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">El Ombù</i>. I have also dropped the tedious
 introduction to the former edition, only preserving, as an appendix, the
 historical part, for the sake of such of my readers as may like to have a
 few facts about the land that England lost.
 </p>
<p>
 W. H. H.
 </p>
<p>
<i>September, 1904.</i>
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
